







High-Level Design Document
AI Chat Assistant for 360° Feedback System


VERSION1.0STATUSDraftDATEMarch 10, 2026MODULE360° Feedback - Phase 1TYPEHigh-Level Design (HLD)





360° Feedback System    Enterprise AI Solutions

Table of Contents
1. System Overview
1.1  Architecture Decisions - Locked
2. Architecture Principles
2.1  Modular Architecture
2.2  API-Driven Integration
2.3  Structured Command Execution
2.4  Hybrid Intent Processing
2.5  Separation of Concerns
2.6  Security and Governance Enforcement
2.7  Future Enterprise Expansion
3. High-Level System Architecture
3.1  User Interface Layer
3.2  Chat Interaction Layer
3.3  AI Processing Layer
3.4  Command Execution Layer
3.5  Integration Layer
3.6  Data & Infrastructure Layer
4. Chat Command Engine Architecture
4.1  Command Processing Pipeline
4.2  Command Types
4.3  Structured Command Model
4.4  Slot Filling Mechanism
4.5  Command Registry Pattern
4.6  Permission Enforcement
4.7  Command Logging
5. Conversation State Architecture
5.1  Conversation State Types
5.2  Session Storage
5.3  Session Model
5.4  Conversation Lifecycle
5.5  Multi-Command Conversations
5.6  Conversation Recovery
6. LLM Integration Architecture
6.1  Responsibilities of the LLM Layer
6.2  Prompt Construction
6.3  Hybrid Intent Detection
6.4  Structured Output Enforcement
6.5  Prompt Configuration System
6.6  Failure Handling
6.7  Multi-Provider Compatibility
7. Security Architecture
7.1  Authentication Enforcement
7.2  Role-Based Access Control
7.3  Attribute-Based Access Control
7.4  Anonymity Enforcement
7.5  Audit Logging
7.6  Prompt Injection Protection
8. Data Flow Architecture
8.1  Query Command Flow
8.2  Action Command Flow
8.3  Conversation State Flow
8.4  Logging and Monitoring Flow
8.5  Chat Log Record Structure
9. Deployment Architecture
9.1  System Components
9.2  Backend Module Integration
9.3  Infrastructure Components
9.4  Scalability Strategy
10. Non-Functional Requirements
10.1  Performance Targets
10.2  System Scale
10.3  Concurrency
10.4  Reliability
10.5  Success Metrics
11. Future Expansion
1. System Overview
The AI Chat Assistant provides a natural language interface for interacting with the 360° Feedback System. Instead of navigating multiple dashboards and configuration screens, users can interact with the system through a conversational chat interface to retrieve information and execute authorized actions.
The assistant translates user messages into structured system commands that interact with the backend services of the 360° Feedback platform. All actions executed by the assistant must pass through existing system APIs and follow the same permission validation, role-based access control, and governance rules defined by the platform.
In Phase 1, the assistant supports operations only for the 360° Feedback module, including feedback cycles, reviewer tasks, templates, reports, and participation tracking. The assistant does not bypass business logic and does not directly access the database. Instead, it operates strictly as an intelligent interface layer that orchestrates commands through the backend service APIs.
Although the initial scope is limited to the 360° Feedback module, the architecture of the chat assistant is designed to support future expansion into a broader enterprise AI assistant capable of interacting with additional HR and enterprise modules such as employee lifecycle management, payroll systems, and organizational analytics.
This design ensures that the chat system can evolve from a module-specific assistant into a multi-domain enterprise automation interface without requiring architectural redesign.
1.1 Architecture Decisions - Locked
The following architectural decisions were evaluated and locked before system design started:
Decision AreaDecisionStatusScope StrategyBuild Option A (360 Feedback only), Architect like Option B (Enterprise)LOCKEDArchitecture StyleModular Monolith - chat module inside Django backendLOCKEDIntent ProcessingHybrid - Rule-based + LLMLOCKEDCommand EngineCommand Registry Pattern (not hardcoded handlers)LOCKEDPrompt ManagementPrompt Configuration System (DB/Config, not hardcoded)LOCKEDSession ModelSingle active session per userLOCKEDChat LoggingSeparate chat_logs table (not mixed with audit_logs)LOCKEDLLM CachingNo caching in Phase 1 - simplicity firstLOCKEDAnalyticsDerived from chat_logs table (Phase 1)LOCKED2. Architecture Principles
The AI Chat Assistant is designed using a set of architectural principles to ensure scalability, security, maintainability, and future extensibility.
2.1 Modular Architecture
The chat assistant will be implemented as a modular component inside the backend system rather than a separate microservice. This approach simplifies deployment and reduces infrastructure complexity while maintaining clear module boundaries.
Each internal component of the chat assistant will be responsible for a specific responsibility such as intent detection, command execution, session management, and conversation logging.
2.2 API-Driven Integration
The chat assistant will not directly access the database or internal data models of the 360° Feedback system. All operations must be executed through existing backend APIs. This ensures that all business logic is enforced consistently, permission validation remains centralized, and system governance rules are not bypassed.
2.3 Structured Command Execution
User messages will be translated into structured commands before execution. Instead of allowing the AI model to directly trigger system actions, the assistant generates structured command objects that are validated and executed by the command engine. This design provides deterministic system behavior, strong security enforcement, and predictable execution workflows.
2.4 Hybrid Intent Processing
The chat assistant supports a hybrid intent detection approach combining rule-based command recognition with LLM-based natural language interpretation. This allows the system to process known commands efficiently, reduce LLM dependency for common requests, and support natural language queries for complex interactions.
2.5 Separation of Concerns
The chat assistant architecture separates the following responsibilities: natural language understanding, command interpretation, command execution, conversation state management, and system integration. This separation ensures maintainability and simplifies future expansion of the assistant to additional enterprise modules.
2.6 Security and Governance Enforcement
The assistant must operate under the same governance rules as the core platform. All commands must respect Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC), anonymity policies, and audit logging requirements. The assistant must never bypass backend authorization checks.
2.7 Future Enterprise Expansion
Although Phase 1 focuses on the 360° Feedback module, the architecture is designed to support expansion into a broader enterprise AI assistant platform capable of interacting with multiple organizational systems.
3. High-Level System Architecture
The AI Chat Assistant operates as an interaction layer on top of the existing 360° Feedback platform. The assistant enables users to perform system queries and execute authorized actions through a conversational interface while ensuring that all operations pass through existing backend APIs and governance controls.
The system architecture consists of five primary layers plus supporting infrastructure components.

3.1 User Interface Layer
The user interface layer provides access to the chat assistant through the web application. Two chat interfaces are supported:
Floating Chat Widget: Accessible from any page within the application. Enables quick commands and information retrieval without leaving the current context.
Dedicated Chat Page: Supports longer conversations, displays conversation history, and provides detailed interaction workflows.
This layer is implemented using the React frontend application.
3.2 Chat Interaction Layer
The Chat Interaction Layer is responsible for receiving user messages and managing chat communication between the frontend and backend. Key responsibilities include receiving user messages, sending system responses, streaming AI responses, managing chat sessions, and retrieving conversation history. This layer communicates with the backend using the Chat API endpoints defined in the PRD.
3.3 AI Processing Layer
The AI Processing Layer interprets natural language messages and converts them into structured system commands. Responsibilities include intent detection, parameter extraction, natural language understanding, and generating conversational responses. This layer uses an external LLM provider for natural language processing while ensuring that outputs follow the structured command schema defined by the system.
3.4 Command Execution Layer
The Command Execution Layer is responsible for validating and executing structured commands produced by the AI processing layer. Responsibilities include validating command structure, validating user permissions, requesting confirmation for action commands, and executing commands through backend APIs. The command engine ensures that AI-generated instructions cannot directly manipulate system data without validation.
3.5 Integration Layer
The Integration Layer connects the chat assistant with the core 360° Feedback system. All commands must interact with the platform through existing system APIs. Direct database access from the chat assistant is not permitted.
System FeatureAPI EndpointMethodCreate feedback cycle/feedback/cyclesPOSTRetrieve feedback summary/feedback/summaryGETCheck pending reviews/reviews/pendingGETRetrieve cycle status/feedback/cycles/{id}GET3.6 Data & Infrastructure Layer
The system relies on several infrastructure components to support the chat functionality.
ComponentPurposePostgreSQLPrimary system database - stores feedback data and chat logsRedisSession storage for conversation state and temporary workflow contextLLM ProviderExternal AI provider for natural language processingDjango BackendCore application logic and chat assistant module4. Chat Command Engine Architecture
The Command Engine is the core component responsible for translating user intentions into executable system actions. It acts as the control layer between natural language processing and the backend system APIs. The Command Engine ensures that AI-generated instructions cannot directly trigger system operations without validation and governance checks.
4.1 Command Processing Pipeline
Every user message follows a defined command processing pipeline that ensures validation at each stage before interacting with the core system.

4.2 Command Types
The chat system supports two categories of commands.
4.2.1 Query Commands
Query commands retrieve system information and do not modify system data. These commands execute immediately without requiring confirmation.
CommandRoleDescriptionshow_my_feedbackEmployeeView personal feedback summaryshow_pending_reviewsManagerList pending review tasksshow_cycle_statusHR AdminView cycle progressshow_team_summaryManagerView team feedback overview4.2.2 Action Commands
Action commands modify system data. Action commands require confirmation before execution.
CommandRoleDescriptioncreate_cycleHR AdminCreate new feedback cyclecreate_templateHR AdminCreate feedback template4.3 Structured Command Model
All commands generated by the system follow a structured JSON format. The command engine validates this structure before execution, including command existence, parameter completeness, parameter data types, and user permissions.
{ "intent": "create_cycle", "parameters": { "department": "Engineering" } }
4.4 Slot Filling Mechanism
If a command is missing required parameters, the system uses a slot filling workflow to request additional information from the user. Once all required parameters are collected, the system proceeds to confirmation.
Example Slot Filling Interaction
User: Create a cycle for Engineering
System: What should be the cycle name?
User: Q3 Performance Review
System: Which template should be used?
4.5 Command Registry Pattern
The command engine uses a Command Registry Pattern for internal implementation. Each command is implemented as a separate handler class registered in the command registry. This pattern enables clean architecture, easier testing, scalability for new commands, and support for future enterprise modules.
CommandHandler Classcreate_cycleCreateCycleCommandshow_my_feedbackShowMyFeedbackCommandshow_pending_reviewsShowPendingReviewsCommandshow_cycle_statusShowCycleStatusCommandcreate_templateCreateTemplateCommand4.6 Permission Enforcement
Before executing any command, the system validates user permissions. Permission validation includes RBAC role checks, ABAC attribute checks, and module-level authorization. If a user attempts an unauthorized command, the system will reject the request and display an appropriate message.
4.7 Command Logging
Every command execution must be logged for auditing and monitoring. Logged data includes user ID, command intent, parameters, execution result, and timestamp. These logs support auditing, debugging, and system analytics.
5. Conversation State Architecture
The AI Chat Assistant must maintain conversational context across multiple messages in order to support multi-step workflows such as slot filling and command confirmation. The Conversation State Architecture manages temporary interaction context during an active chat session while ensuring that long-term conversation history is stored for auditing and analytics.

5.1 Conversation State Types
5.1.1 Active Session State
Active session state stores temporary information required to complete an ongoing command interaction, such as detected intent, extracted parameters, missing parameters, and pending command confirmation. This state is cleared when the command execution workflow completes.
{ "intent": "create_cycle", "department": "Engineering", "cycle_name": "Q3 Review", "pending_field": "template_id" }
5.1.2 Persistent Conversation History
All chat conversations are stored in persistent storage for audit logging, debugging, analytics, and user conversation history. Stored data includes user messages, detected intents, system responses, executed commands, and timestamps.
5.2 Session Storage
Active conversation state will be stored in Redis as an in-memory session store. Benefits include fast access, support for multiple concurrent sessions, and horizontal scalability. Session expiration will occur after a defined inactivity timeout of 15-30 minutes.
5.3 Session Model
The system supports a single active session per user. This design avoids conversation state conflicts, simplifies Redis session management, enables easier debugging, and prevents parameter leakage between sessions. Multiple concurrent conversations are not supported in Phase 1.
5.4 Conversation Lifecycle
A conversation session follows this lifecycle: chat opened ? session created ? message received ? intent detected ? parameters collected (slot filling) ? command confirmation ? command execution ? session reset or conversation continues.
5.5 Multi-Command Conversations
A single conversation may contain multiple commands. The system must reset session state once a command workflow is completed to prevent parameter leakage between commands.
5.6 Conversation Recovery
If a user refreshes the application or reconnects to the chat system, the system should attempt to restore the active session state when possible. Conversation recovery is supported by storing session identifiers and retrieving the active state from the Redis session store.
6. LLM Integration Architecture
The AI Chat Assistant relies on an external Large Language Model (LLM) provider to interpret natural language input and generate structured commands. The LLM layer is responsible for transforming user messages into machine-readable command representations while maintaining conversational capabilities.
The LLM is used only for language understanding and response generation. All system actions are executed through the command engine after validation.

6.1 Responsibilities of the LLM Layer
The LLM layer performs the following tasks: natural language intent detection, parameter extraction from user messages, conversational responses, and summarization tasks. The LLM never directly executes system operations. All outputs must conform to the structured command schema defined by the system.
6.2 Prompt Construction
Each LLM request will be constructed using a structured prompt that combines system instructions, conversation context, and the current user message. System instructions define the assistant's role and supported command structure. Conversation context contains relevant recent chat messages required for intent interpretation.
6.3 Hybrid Intent Detection
The system uses a hybrid intent detection strategy. Intent processing follows this order: first, the rule-based intent parser checks for known command patterns. If a command is recognized, it is executed directly without LLM involvement. Otherwise, the message is forwarded to the LLM service for natural language interpretation.
This approach provides faster responses for common commands, reduced LLM usage cost, and improved reliability for known operations.
6.4 Structured Output Enforcement
The LLM must generate outputs that conform to the structured command schema. The system validates the structure before passing it to the command engine. If the output does not conform to the expected schema, the system will request clarification from the user.
6.5 Prompt Configuration System
Prompt templates are stored in a configuration layer (database or configuration service) rather than hardcoded in the codebase. This enables prompt tuning without redeployment, version control of prompts, and future A/B testing capabilities.
FieldDescriptionidUnique identifier for the prompt templatenameTemplate name (e.g., intent_detection, response_generation)template_textThe prompt template with variable placeholdersversionVersion number for tracking prompt iterationscreated_atTimestamp of template creation6.6 Failure Handling
The system must gracefully handle LLM failures including service unavailability, invalid structured output, and low confidence intent detection. Fallback behavior includes requesting user clarification, suggesting supported commands, and retrying with simplified prompts.
6.7 Multi-Provider Compatibility
The architecture introduces an LLM service abstraction layer that allows switching between LLM providers (OpenAI, Gemini, Anthropic, and others) without modifying the core chat system. The abstraction follows the pattern: Chat Module ? LLM Service Interface ? LLM Provider Adapter ? External LLM API.
7. Security Architecture
The AI Chat Assistant must operate under the same security and governance policies enforced by the 360° Feedback platform. The chat interface must never bypass existing authorization logic or access sensitive data without proper validation. All commands executed by the assistant must pass through backend APIs that enforce system security policies.

7.1 Authentication Enforcement
Users must be authenticated through the existing platform authentication system before accessing the chat assistant. Authentication is validated through user session tokens, secure authentication middleware, and backend session verification. The chat assistant will not implement a separate authentication mechanism.
7.2 Role-Based Access Control
All commands executed by the assistant must respect Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). Each command will be mapped to a list of authorized roles. The command engine validates permissions before executing any command.
CommandAllowed Rolescreate_cycleHR Admincreate_templateHR Adminshow_my_feedbackEmployeeshow_pending_reviewsManagershow_cycle_statusHR Adminshow_team_summaryManager7.3 Attribute-Based Access Control
In addition to RBAC, certain operations require attribute-level validation. For example, managers can only view reports for their team members, and employees can only access their own feedback data. These validations must be enforced by the backend APIs.
7.4 Anonymity Enforcement
The chat assistant must respect the anonymity rules defined by the 360° Feedback system. This includes masking reviewer identities, enforcing peer threshold rules (minimum 3 peer submissions before peer data is visible), and preventing identity inference. The assistant must never expose reviewer identity when anonymity policies prohibit it.
7.5 Audit Logging
All chat interactions and executed commands must be logged for auditing. Logged events include user messages, detected intents, command execution attempts, successful command execution, and rejected commands. These logs support governance, debugging, and compliance requirements.
7.6 Prompt Injection Protection
The system must protect against malicious prompts attempting to override system instructions. Protection mechanisms include strict structured command validation, command registry verification, and backend permission enforcement. Even if the LLM generates an unsafe command, the command engine must reject it.
8. Data Flow Architecture
The AI Chat Assistant processes user interactions through a structured data flow pipeline that ensures natural language interpretation, command validation, and secure execution through backend APIs. The system separates language interpretation, command validation, and system execution into distinct stages to maintain reliability and security.

8.1 Query Command Flow
Query commands retrieve system information and do not modify data. The flow is: User Message ? Intent Detection ? Command Engine ? Feedback API ? Data Retrieved ? Response Generated ? User. The response is generated using data returned from the backend APIs.
8.2 Action Command Flow
Action commands modify system data and follow a more controlled workflow: User Request ? Intent Detection ? Parameter Extraction ? Slot Filling (if required) ? Confirmation Request ? User Confirmation ? Command Execution ? Backend API ? System Response. The confirmation step prevents accidental execution of critical system actions.
8.3 Conversation State Flow
Conversation state management ensures that multi-step interactions maintain context. Session state is temporarily stored in Redis and cleared after command completion. This allows the system to track detected intents, extracted parameters, and pending slot fields across multiple message exchanges.
8.4 Logging and Monitoring Flow
Every interaction is logged to the chat_logs table for monitoring and governance. Analytics metrics including intent success rate, command success rate, LLM usage rate, and unsupported query rate are derived directly from the chat_logs table in Phase 1.
MetricCalculation MethodIntent detection accuracysuccessful_intents / total_messagesCommand success ratesuccessful_commands / attempted_commandsUnsupported query rateunknown_intents / total_messagesAverage conversation turnsavg(messages_per_session)LLM usage ratellm_requests / total_requests8.5 Chat Log Record Structure
Each chat interaction produces a log record with the following structure:
{ "user_id": "hr_admin_102", "message": "Create cycle for Engineering", "intent": "create_cycle", "execution_status": "success", "timestamp": "2026-03-10T11:25:00" }
9. Deployment Architecture
The AI Chat Assistant will be deployed as a module within the existing backend infrastructure of the 360° Feedback System. The system follows a Modular Monolith architecture, ensuring simplified deployment while maintaining clean internal module boundaries. This architecture minimizes operational complexity while supporting future scalability.

9.1 System Components
ComponentPurposeReact FrontendChat interface (widget + dedicated page) and web applicationDjango BackendCore application logic with DRF REST APIsChat Assistant ModuleChat processing, intent detection, and command executionPostgreSQLPrimary system database and chat log storageRedisSession storage for conversation stateLLM ProviderExternal AI provider for natural language processingNginxReverse proxy and static file serving9.2 Backend Module Integration
The chat assistant is implemented as an internal module inside the Django backend system, alongside existing modules.
Backend Module Structure
backend/  auth/  organization/  review_cycle_engine/  reviewer_workflow_engine/  feedback_processing/  dashboard_engine/  security_audit/  chat_assistant/  (NEW)
Chat Assistant Module Components
chat_assistant/  chat_controller  intent_parser  command_registry  command_handlers/  llm_service  session_manager  prompt_builder  chat_logger
9.3 Infrastructure Components
PostgreSQL
Primary relational database storing feedback system data, conversation logs, command execution logs, and prompt template configurations.
Redis
Used for session state, conversation context storage, and temporary workflow state. Session expiration is configured for 15-30 minutes of inactivity.
LLM Provider
External AI provider responsible for natural language understanding. Accessed through the LLM Service Interface abstraction layer, supporting provider switching without code changes.
9.4 Scalability Strategy
The architecture supports future scaling through vertical scaling of backend servers, horizontal scaling of application containers, and distributed Redis session storage. If system usage grows significantly beyond 1,000 users, the chat module can be extracted as an independent service.
10. Non-Functional Requirements
10.1 Performance Targets
OperationTarget TimeIntent detection< 1 secondQuery responses< 3 secondsCommand execution< 5 secondsStreaming start< 1 second10.2 System Scale
The system will support up to 1,000 users within a single organization. The architecture will remain SaaS-ready for future multi-tenant expansion.
10.3 Concurrency
The system must support multiple simultaneous chat sessions, concurrent command execution, and stable performance during peak usage.
10.4 Reliability
The system must gracefully handle LLM downtime, backend API failures, and network interruptions. Users must receive clear fallback messages in all failure scenarios.
10.5 Success Metrics
MetricTargetIntent detection accuracy= 90%Command completion rate= 85%Average turns to complete command= 4Average response time< 3 secondsUser adoption rate= 50% of active users11. Future Expansion
The architecture is designed to support the following future capabilities:
• Multi-tenant SaaS architecture for serving multiple organizations
• AI analytics insights and intelligent recommendations
• Automation workflows triggered by chat commands
• Integration with additional enterprise modules (Payroll, HR Lifecycle, Recruitment)
• Multiple concurrent conversation sessions per user
• LLM response caching for frequently asked queries
• Advanced analytics pipeline separate from chat_logs
The modular adapter-based architecture ensures that new modules can be integrated without redesigning the core chat system.


End of Document
HLD - AI Chat Assistant for 360° Feedback System	High-Level Design Document

360° Feedback System	Page 

